### CPSC 320 Assignment 1
**Member 1:** o4d0b@ugrad.cs.ubc.ca
**Member 2:** z1a0b@ugrad.cs.ubc.ca

> All group members have read and followed the [guidelines for academic conduct
> in CPSC 320](http://blogs.ubc.ca/cpsc3202017W1/syllabus/#conduct). As part of those rules, when collaborating with anyone outside my group, 
> (1) I and my collaborators took no record but names (and GradeScope information) away, and 
> (2) after a suitable break, my group created the assignment I am submitting without help from anyone other than the course staff."

#### Problem 1.1
**Assume that we want to check whether the given value exists and find its index in the array.**
Use the brute force algorithm.

#### Problem 1.2
**Assume that we want to check whether the given value exists and find its index in the array.**
Use the binary search algorithm.

#### Problem 1.4
```
// Given a sorted array "A" containing at least one pair of values
// v1 and v2 such that v1 + v2 = target, returns such a pair (v1, v2)
// Assume that `pair` is a struct containing fields "v1" and "v2".
func FindPair(A, target)
{
    for each pair `p` in A
        if p.v1 + p.v2 equals to target
            return p
        end if
    end for
}
```
Worst case: `O(n)` when the pair we want to find is the last one in the array.

#### Problem 1.5
Let the first pair of the array `A` be the one we want to find.
i.e. `v1` and `v2` of the first pair sums to `target`.
In this case, the above algorithm always runs `O(1)` time.

#### Problem 1.6
Let the last pair of the array `A` be the one we want to find.
i.e. `v1` and `v2` of the last pair sums to `target`.
In this case, the above algorithm always runs `O(n)` time.

#### Problem 1.7
```
// Return the three smallest values in the given array "A" as (v1, v2, v3)
// where v1 < v2 < v3 and "A" is an unordered array (of length >= 3)
func FindSmallestThree(A)
{
    // Assume that the first 3 elements of A are the smallest three values
    Let v1 be the 1st element of A (A[0])
    Let v2 be the 2nd element of A (A[1])
    Let v3 be the 3rd element of A (A[2])
    
    // But they are unordered. 
    // Sorting three values takes constant time.
    Sort the (v1, v2, v3) so that v1 < v2 < v3
    
    // Starts from the 4th element (if it exists)
    // to find values that are smaller than the current three.
    for (index = 3; index < A.length; index++)
    {
        Let current be the "i"th element in A (A[index])
        
        // Found a value that is smaller than v1
        if current < v1
            v3 = v2
            v2 = v1
            v1 = current
            continue the for loop
        end if
        
        // Found a value that is smaller than v2
        if current < v2
            v3 = v2
            v2 = current
            continue the for loop
        end if
        
        // Found a value that is smaller than v3
        if current < v3
            v3 = current
            continue the for loop
        end if
    }
    
    return (v1, v2, v3)
}
```

#### Problem 1.9
Some algorithms for solving this problem may first sort the given array and then extract the first three elements, while some algorithms may choose to iterate through the array.
Since the algorithm is designed to deal with the unordered array, it cannot make any assumption about the given array. 
Therefore, even though the given array is already sorted, the algorithm still has to perform some "trivial" operations to satisfy its certain condition before selecting the desired elements and cannot perform better.

#### Problem 2.1
Assume that the preference list of a person in a STP instance indicates the indifference by using "=" notation such that m<sub>1</sub> > m<sub>2</sub> = m<sub>3</sub>.

```
// Assume that each person has a field to represent the preference list.
// STP contains all data of a STP instance; returns a valid SMP instance.
func TransformInstance(STP)
    Let M be the set of men in `STP`
    Let W be the set of women in `STP`
    for each m in M
        replace all "=" notations with ">" in m's preference list
    for each w in W
        replace all "=" notations with ">" in w's preference list
    return the modified instance

// SMPSol is a set of pairs that represents a SMP solution
func TransformSolution(SMPSol)
    Do nothing to the given SMP solution but return it.
```

#### Problem 2.2
**Proof:**
Suppose that there is a strong instability in the STP solution.
Consider the following simplified case:

```
m1: w2 > w1        w1: ...

m2: ...            w2: m1 > m2
```

In the solution `S`, m<sub>1</sub> is paired with w<sub>1</sub> and m<sub>2</sub> is paired with w<sub>2</sub>, but actually m<sub>1</sub> and w<sub>2</sub> prefer each other.

In this case, (m<sub>1</sub>, w<sub>2</sub>) is the strong instability of `S`.
We don't care about whether there are ties in the preference lists of m<sub>2</sub> and w<sub>1</sub>, because our `TransformInstance` algorithm removes them in the preference list.

Assume that the SMP solver produces a valid and good solution, so it will give us a stable solution.
However, our STP solution `S` is unstable, which implies that the solution produced by the SMP solver is also unstable. This generates a contradiction.

Therefore, our reduction should produce a solution without strong instabilities. Q.E.D.

#### Problem 2.5
**STP Instance:**

```
m1: w1 = w2        w1: m1 > m2
m2: w1 > w2        w2: m1 > m2
```

**Matching Result 1:**
m<sub>1</sub> is paired with w<sub>1</sub>; m<sub>2</sub> is paired with w<sub>2</sub>.

In this case, w<sub>2</sub> prefers m<sub>1</sub> than her current partner m<sub>2</sub>, but m<sub>1</sub> does not care about which woman is his partner, so there is a weak instability in this solution.

**Matching Result 2:**
m<sub>1</sub> is paired with w<sub>2</sub>; m<sub>2</sub> is paired with w<sub>1</sub>.

In this case, w<sub>1</sub> prefers m<sub>1</sub> than her current partner m<sub>2</sub>, but m<sub>1</sub> does not care about which woman is his partner, so there is also a weak instability in this solution.

**Explanation:**
As long as there are ties in a person `p`'s preference list, there always exists another person `q` (whose sex is, of course, opposite to `p`) who is ranked the same as <code>q<sup>'</sup></code> in `p`'s preference list, and prefers `p` than his/her current partner in a valid STP solution.

No matter how we match them (`p`'s partner is either `q` or <code>q<sup>'</sup></code>), from <code>q<sup>'</sup></code>/`q`'s perspective, one of them always forms a weak instability in the solution, because they both prefers `p` than their current partner but only one of them can marry `p`.

#### Problem 2.6
**SMP Instance:**

```
m1: w2 > w1        w1: m1 > m2
m2: w2 > w1        w2: m1 > m2
```

**Run the G-S algorithm: (Women propose to men)**
(0) Initially, all women are free and in the free list.
(1) w<sub>1</sub> proposes to her first choice m<sub>1</sub>, and m<sub>1</sub> accepts her proposal.
(2) Now we have a pair (w<sub>1</sub>, m<sub>1</sub>), and only w<sub>2</sub> is in the free list.
(3) w<sub>2</sub> proposes to her first choice m<sub>1</sub>, and m<sub>1</sub> decides to break up with w<sub>1</sub> and accepts w<sub>2</sub>'s proposal.
(4) Now we have a new pair (w<sub>2</sub>, m<sub>1</sub>), but w<sub>1</sub> is in the free list again.
(5) w<sub>1</sub> proposes to her second choice m<sub>2</sub>, and m<sub>2</sub> accepts her proposal.
(6) Now we have (w<sub>2</sub>, m<sub>1</sub>) and (w<sub>1</sub>, m<sub>2</sub>).
(7) No women are left in the free list, so the G-S algorithm terminates and returns the above set of pairs.

There is no instability in the solution.

#### Problem 3.1
The given statement is **NEVER** true.

```
m : w' > w          w : m' > m

m': w > w'          w': m > m'
```

Initially, `m` is paired with `w` and `m'` is paired with `w'`. After the swapping, all of them become better.

**Brief Proof:**
(1) If both pairs `(m, w), (m', w')` form an instability, swapping them **makes all of them better off**, because every person prefers to other than the current partner.
(2) If there is only one pair that forms an instability, swapping them **makes at least two people better off**, but also **makes at least one person worse off**, because it is possible that a person prefers his/her current partner to the one after the swapping.
(3) If both pairs are stable, swapping them **makes all of them worse off**, because they all want to be paired with their current partner.
Therefore, it is impossible to make some of them (but not all of them) better off without making someone worse off.

#### Problem 3.2
**Proof:**
Suppose that the SMP solution is not strong Pareto optimal, which means that we can swap two pairs to make at least one person better off while others remain the same.

We have already showed that there are only three possible outcomes of swapping two pairs in the above problem. 
We want to make no one worse off, so the only valid outcome is the first case: all people in two pairs are better off, which implies that both pairs `(m, w), (m', w')` form an instability and the SMP solution becomes unstable.

However, the SMP solution is valid and stable, so a stable solution is also strong Pareto optimal.
Q.E.D.

#### Problem 3.4
**Proof:**
Suppose that a valid solution is not weak Pareto optimal, which means that we can swap two pairs to make everyone better off.

Since we have `n >= 3`, there are at least three pairs in a valid SMP solution. 
Since we can only swap two pairs, the maximum number of people that will be better off is 4 (the 1st case in `Problem 3.1`), and there exists at least one pair that will not be affected by the swapping and those people are neither better off nor worse off. (contradiction)

Therefore, it is impossible to make everyone better off, which implies that any valid solution to SMP instances with `n >= 3` is weak Pareto optimal. 

#### Problem 4.1
Assume that a node contains fields `leftTree`, `rightTree`, `key` to represent the left subtree, right subtree and the associated key.

```
// precondition: the tree rooted at `root` is non-empty
// postcondition: produces the key with minimum value in the tree
func FindMin(root)
{
    // The current node
    Let current = root
    
    while (current.leftTree is not NULL)
        current = current.leftTree
    end
    
    return current.key
}

// precondition: key is present in the tree rooted at `root`, 
//               and key has a successor also present in the tree.
func FindSuccessor(key, root)
{
    Let successor be NULL initially
    
    // Lookup the node that is associated with the given `key`
    Let current = root
    
    // Binary search and record the potential successor
    while (current is not NULL)
        if current.key > key
            current = current.rightTree
        else if current.key < key
            successor = current
            current = current.leftTree
        else
            break the loop
        end if
    end
    
    // We have found that `current` is associated with the given `key`
    // Check whether it has a right subtree
    if current.rightTree is not NULL
        // Find the minimum value of its right subtree
        return FindMin(current)
    else
        // Return the recorded successor (i.e. its parent node)
        return successor
    end if
}
```

#### Problem 4.5
**Proof:**
The given `IsMaxHeap` function defines three recursive guards (or base cases).

**Base Case 1:**

```
if root is empty, then returns TRUE.
```

If a tree rooted at `root` is empty, then it satisfies the max heap property.
Therefore, this base case is correct.

**Base Case 2:**

```
if root.left exists and root.left.key > root.key, then returns FALSE.
```

Given a node `N` in a max heap, the value of its left child must be less than or equal to the value of `N`, which is checked by this base case.
Therefore, this base case is correct.

**Base Case 3:**

```
if root.right exists and root.right.key > root.key, then returns FALSE.
```

Given a node `N` in a max heap, the value of its right child must be less than or equal to the value of `N`, which is checked by this base case.
Therefore, this base case is correct.

**Recursion:**

```
return IsMaxHeap(root.left) && IsMaxHeap(root.right)
```

Lastly, this function checks whether both children of the given node `N` satisfy the heap property by checking base cases mentioned above recursively.
We have proved that all base cases are implemented correctly, so the recursive calls will produce correct results.

Therefore, the given function is correct. Q.E.D.

#### Problem 4.6
Since the given tree is a balanced BST, we can perform an **in-order** traversal to find the first 150 keys, which runs `O(n)` time.

#### Problem 5.2
We can use a queue to perform a breath-first traversal to solve this problem.
**Assume that each edge has a length of 1.**
**Even if it is not 1, the basic idea is roughly the same.**

Initially, all vertexes are not affected by the spell.
Let `distance` be the effective distance performed by the spell.
Let `current` be the current depth or layer of the traversal and is initialized to `0`.

Create a queue `Q` to store vertexes that are to be traversed.
Mark the `start` vertex affected and put it in the queue `Q`.

We use the queue data structure because it takes O(1) to enqueue/dequeue an element and has the FIFO property, which makes it easy to track unvisited vertexes in order.

Now we start the breath-first search
While the queue `Q` is not empty, we perform the following steps:
(0-0) Guard: If the current depth `current` is larger than the given `distance`, stop the search.
(0-1) Check the number of vertexes we have visited in this layer and update the `current` depth accordingly.
(1) First dequeue a vertex `v` from the `Q`.
(2) Find the adjacent vertexes of `v` and record the number of them.
(3) Enqueue all unaffected adjacent vertexes.
(4) Mark all unaffected adjacent vertexes affected.

The while loop breaks, and we have marked all vertexes that can be affected by the magic spell.

#### Problem 5.3
Suppose that each edge in the given cave map is labeled with the number of dangerous creatures, which can be considered as the distance between two vertexes.

So the problem can be reduced to:

```
Given a graph, a `start` vertex and a set of `exits` vertexes,
for each `exit` vertex, find the shortest path from the `start` to `exit`.
```

Then we can use the priority queue to apply the Dijkstra's algorithm.

First we set the distance to all vertexes (except the start vertex) to infinity and set the distance from `start` to `start` to `0`.
Then we create a priority queue `Q` and to track unvisited vertexes.
Initially all vertexes are unvisited and in the `Q`.

Since all vertexes are associated with a `distance` (from the `start` vertex) property, we always want to select a vertex with the smallest distance from the `Q`.
The backend implementation of a priority queue can use a heap, so it only takes `O(1)` to find the next vertex with the smallest distance, and `O(logn)` to remove it and maintain the heap property.

Now we extract the vertex `v` with the smallest distance from the `Q` and calculate (and update if the new distance is smaller than the current distance) the distance for `v`'s adjacent vertexes.

We have visited the vertex `v`, so we remove it from the `Q`, which takes `O(logn)` time. Back to the extraction step until we visit the given `exit` vertex.

#### Problem 5.6
Since the given string only contains `a-z` and each character is a valid ASCII character, we first create an integer array of size 26 to record the number of occurrences for each character, such that
`array[00]` is the number of `a`,
`array[01]` is the number of `b`,
......
`array[25]` is the number of `z`.

Scan and read the ASCII code of each character in the given string.
The ASCII codes of `a-z` are `97-122`, so we can subtract 97 from the ASCII code to find the corresponding slot in our `array` easily and increment the `counter` accordingly.

Lastly, iterate over the `array`, find the largest `counter` and produce the corresponding character.

#### Problem 6.1
MMP instance:

```
p1: Mentor List: p2; Mentee List: p2

p2: Mentor List: p1; Mentee List: p1
```

The reduction algorithm produces a solution: {(p<sub>1</sub>, p<sub>2</sub>)}.
(i.e. p<sub>1</sub> is p<sub>2</sub>'s mentor.)

This reduction fails because it only assigns mentors for the second half of employees. The first half of employees have no mentor assigned.

In general, if the given number of employees `n = 2k` is a even number, the reduction only produces `n/2` pairs, which means that only half of employees have mentors assigned. However, a valid solution of MMP should make sure that each person has exactly one mentor and exactly one mentee, so we should expect `n` pairs in the solution.

If the given number of employees `n = 2k + 1` is an odd number, the reduction does not work properly: We can assign the first `k` employees to be the set of men `M` and the rest `k + 1` employees to be the set of women `W`, but such assignment is not a valid SMP instance.

#### Problem 6.4
**(a)**
MMP instance:

```
p1: Mentor List: p2; Mentee List: p2

p2: Mentor List: p1; Mentee List: p1
```

**(b)**
SMP instance produced by the reduction:

```
Men:                    Women:
p1: p2 > p1             p1: p2 > p1

p2: p1 > p2             p2: p1 > p2
```

**(c)**
Stable SMP Solution: {(p<sub>1</sub>, p<sub>2</sub>), (p<sub>2</sub>, p<sub>1</sub>)}.

**(d)**
Stable MMP Solution: {(p<sub>1</sub>, p<sub>2</sub>), (p<sub>2</sub>, p<sub>1</sub>)}.

Each pair in the solution is an **ordered** pair now.
(p<sub>i</sub>, p<sub>j</sub>) means that p<sub>i</sub> is p<sub>j</sub>'s mentor.

**(e)**
p<sub>1</sub> is p<sub>2</sub>'s mentor, and p<sub>2</sub> is p<sub>1</sub>'s mentor.

#### Problem 6.5
**Proof:**
Suppose that a person `p` is eventually assigned to be `p`'s mentor in the solution.
It means that `p` is rejected by the first `n - 1` people (denoted by `G`) in its preference list.
This also implies that every person in `G` prefers other people than `p`, which means that `p` must be ranked the lowest in the preference list of those people.
However, we know that the reduction algorithm guarantees that every person `e` adds themselves to the end of the list. 
**"e $\neq$ q"** generates a contradiction, so `p` cannot be the mentor of itself.
Therefore, no two employees can both be assigned themselves as mentors. Q.E.D.







